---
title: Web Development Program Pre-work
---

## Summary

Welcome to the Suncoast Developers Guild pre-work. These resources are designed
to help you get ready to be successful in the program.

If you have never done any programming, or have minimal experiences with these
technologies we _require_ you to focus on the
[pre-work](/lessons/prework/prework) section and do the reading and exercises
found within.

_NOTE:_ There are a number of required tasks found within these sections,
including several forms to fill out. Please take care to complete all of these
at your earliest convenience.

## What is pre-work?

Pre-work is a series of articles, videos, blogs and other useful information
designed to set you up for success at Suncoast Developers Guild. In addition to
setting context, this will help start your journey on the right path and help
frame what and how you will be learning.

## Why does pre-work help?

Starting learning before the program is like training for a marathon. You don't
show up the day of the race and start; you need to train beforehand. In our
program, your brain is the muscle that needs to prepare. This pre-work is
training for your mind.

Ideally, when the program begins, you'll hear concepts for a second time. The
plan is, the 2nd time you learn it, it sticks. And by the third time you learn
it, you're able to teach it. That means you should be reviewing, learning and
playing with the material before day 1.

## What won't the Pre-work do for you

Pre-work only covers the basics; What we teach goes much more in-depth than
tutorials can cover. Pre-work is not designed to try to explain everything about
web development. We use it to establish context and a shared language to
jump-start the learning process.

Pre-work, and also the curriculum, is not the single source of truth to get
started. The information for all of our technologies is out there, available to
all. We love this, embrace it, and encourage you to learn both inside and
outside the class.
