---
title: This Journey
order: 3
---

Going through this course is a fantastic journey, full of highs and lows. Here
are some topics/articles to read through as you mentally prepare yourself to
begin class:

## Learn how to adapt to the fast pace

This course moves _quickly_ as we cover a large amount of material in a short
time frame. Managing your time and learning to cope with the pacing of the
course helps ensure you can sustain yourself.

Read:
[7 Time Management Tips for Students](https://www.topuniversities.com/blog/7-time-management-tips-students)

Read:
[Manipulate Time With These Powerful 20 Time Management Tips](https://www.forbes.com/sites/johnrampton/2018/05/01/manipulate-time-with-these-powerful-20-time-management-tips)

## Everyone has something to teach

Even if someone participates with "just a question," it benefits the classroom
and yourself. The chances are that someone else has that question. Great
learners ask great questions – never forget that!

Lectures and lab time are interactive with the instructors, mentors, staff,
community, and peers. We encourage you to take advantage of this time to work
together, interact, ask and answer questions.

## Automating, scheduling, and decision fatigue

We are hardwired to need breaks every 90-120 minutes. We've considered this in
the schedule for each day. During your open lab time, focus on scheduling your
energy, not your time. Block out parts of your day for exercise, for reading
\(fiction\), for cooking, for family, for anything not coding related.

Group similar activities; if you need to respond to email, read and respond in
batches. If you need to work on an assignment, do it without looking around at
non-coding websites, checking social media, or reading emails.

Focus is important.

## There is no excuse not to work on high-priority items first.

To overcome decision fatigue and be more productive in general, the author Tim
Ferris recommends putting systems and processes in place that automate as much
thinking as possible. The goal is to turn open-ended questions \(What am I going
to eat for breakfast?\) into if/then statements \(If it’s a weekday, I’m going
to have a protein shake for breakfast\).

Adopt the same priorities: as soon as lunch begins, take a mental break, go for
a walk, and then get to work and **remove distractions**. Computers give us too
many excuses not to focus on our task at hand; don't let them control you.

[Urgency vs. importance](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newHTE_91.htm)
is one way to organize activities. A process like this can help focus on what to
work on next.

## Talking the lingo

During your time here, you will communicate technical ideas in various ways.
Writing, speaking, and talking about code, being a developer, a tool you are
using, and so forth gives you leverage and knowledge. You learn to put into
words what you know, what you don't know, how you emotionally feel, and how you
can brand yourself. Those thoughts, ideas, and takeaways are in essence
"pre-meditated" and prepared so that when you rub shoulders with and interview
with employers, clients, and customers, you have something eloquent enough to
deliver and memorable enough to recall
