---
title: Activity
order: 2
---

## Wordy

- Given a sentence, find the length of the shortest word

## Change please

Given any amount of change from zero cents to 99 cents, determine the minimum
number of coins to make change. Consider only quarters, dimes, nickles, and
pennies.

For example: 6 cents = 1 penny, 1 nickle, 0 dimes, 0 quarters 11 cents = 1
penny, 0 nickles, 1 dime, 0 quarters 43 cents = 3 pennies, 1 nickle, 1 dime, 1
quarter

## Colorful Triangles

From: https://www.codewars.com/kata/5a25ac6ac5e284cfbe000111/train/ruby

A coloured triangle is created from a row of colours, each of which is red,
green or blue. Successive rows, each containing one fewer colour than the last,
are generated by considering the two touching colours in the previous row. If
these colours are identical, the same colour is used in the new row. If they are
different, the missing colour is used in the new row. This is continued until
the final row, with only a single colour, is generated.

The different possibilities are:

```
Colour here:        G G        B G        R G        B R
Becomes colour:      G          R          B          G
```

With a bigger example:

```
R R G B R G B B
 R B R G B R B
  G G B R G G
   G R G B G
    B B R R
     B G R
      R B
       G
```

You will be given the first row of the triangle as a string and its your job to
return the final colour which would appear in the bottom row as a string. In the
case of the example above, you would the given `RRGBRGBB` you should return `G`.

## Calculator

When writing math formulas we work in what is known as "infix" notation. For
instance `5 + ((1 + 2) * 4) - 3`. This is where the
[PEDMAS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Order_of_operations#Mnemonics) rule
helps. (Parentheses, Exponents, Multiplication/Division, Addition/Subtraction)

However, there is another way to represent these operations. This is known as
"Reverse Polish Notation." The description "Polish" refers to the nationality of
logician Jan Łukasiewicz who invented Polish notation in 1924.

If you ever used an older style Hewlett Packard Calculator you've experienced
RPN.

The statement `5 + ((1 + 2) * 4) - 3` in RPN would be: `5 1 2 + 4 * + 3 -`

To evaluate this, you would take the sequence `1 2 +` and turn that into a `3`,
then apply the `4 *` (12), then we would apply `5 +`, and finally `- 3`

Your job is to create a calculator which evaluates expressions in Reverse Polish
notation. The value of the RPN above is `14`
