---
title: Wisdom of the Staff
order: 1
---

# Advice from SDG Staff

The advice here comes from the staff at SDG. These are things we'd like you to
consider at the beginning of this course and to reflect on during the times you
find yourself challenged and struggling. (It _WILL_ happen, it happens to every
student)

**Take this advice to heart** and it will serve you well during your cohort.

## Ask Questions

This is your time to ask the questions you want. If your question comes up
during lecture time, lab time, or an offline discussion is a better place to
address your question we'll let you know.

## This is a marathon and not a sprint

You can't keep a marathon pace for the entire course. Pace yourself. There are
going to be lessons where the knowledge comes to you at a slower pace than
others.

## Learning has a lag period

You will find that your comfort level with a tool or concept will often lag
behind the lesson and assignment. Do not fret. Everything in the course builds
on all that comes prior so you will have opportunities to practice.

## You aren't going to remember everything

You also aren't going to learn everything. We are giving you an introduction to
full-stack development and we are doing it at a quick pace. Your comfort level
and knowledge will lag and you **will** feel like you don't understand
_anything_. Work on learning to be _ok_ with that feeling.

## Slow is smooth and smooth is fast

Don't try to rush through the homework assignments. There are no extra points
for finishing first or last. The assignments will take you a lot of time to
complete. And if you do complete the assignment with time to spare we have bonus
modes, _adventure_, and _epic_, to keep you busy.

## "Measure twice, and cut once"

This is good for woodworking and homework assignments. When an assignment is
given, **READ THE ENTIRE ASSIGNMENT** first, up through _explorer mode_. Then
spend some time planning out the steps for the assignment. **Get together with
other students** and discuss your plans. It often helps to ensure you know what
the assignment is asking for and how to approach it before diving in. On a
typical day when we end lecture time at noon, and pick up again at 3:00, use the
time after lunch and before 3:00 to map out your attack on the homework. If you
happen to _start_ the homework before 3:00 consider that a bonus.

## Keep your eye on the prize, but not too close

Don't fret right away about your portfolio, resume, capstone project,
interviews, etc. as there will be time for those tasks as we proceed. Do keep
good time management in mind, but recognize that there is time for all the tasks
we ask you to do.

## Trust the process

We've done this before so we know of what we speak. You **will** feel like you
are falling behind and you **will** feel like you aren't understanding as much
as you like. Trust us to be the judges of that. Put all your effort in and we
will tell you where you need to focus.

## Focus on the "now", Work on the current homework before the old

At some point, you will fall behind on homework. Work on _todays_ assignment
before trying to catch up on past assignments. If you need to work on old homework
first your instructor will let you know which homework is the most critical.

## Look backward more than you look forward

Learning software development is a lifelong process. Each new thing you learn
will reveal an entire world of learning. There will **always** be more you
**don't** know than you **do** know even after years of learning.

So during the program spend more time looking backward to where you started and
how far you've come rather than focusing on how much more there is ahead of you.
Find excitement in what you have learned so far and how it will power you to
take on all the new challenges ahead.

## Find time to take breaks

Find time to breathe. Find time to play games. Find time to watch TV. Find time
for activities that provide rest and relaxation.

## Share your success

Also, find time to share what you have learned with your friends and family. One
way to solidify learning anything is to explain it to others. So when you finish
an assignment you are proud of **show it off**. Try to explain how it works and
what you did to make it work. Take pride in your work!
