# Technical Skills

This curriculum is designed to take you from knowing nothing to being a junior software developer in a short time. While this is true from a software developer skill perspective, coming into the course, it is highly recommended to have some basic computer skills to help make your journey into software a bit less jarring.

## Computer Management

Everything a developer does is focused around on editing files. You should be comfortable with managing files from the finder/explorer. You should be to at least:

- renaming files
- changing file extensions
- moving files
- creating files
- opening files

Bonus points if you can do these from the terminal. 

## Web Browsing

This course focuses on becoming a web developer. As such, some basic web knowledge is highly encouraged. We do not expect you to be [a Vint Cerf](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vint_Cerf) but should be able to :

- Clear your cache
- navigate to the website directly from the address bar
- create an account on a new website
- feel comfortable figuring out how to use a website
- knowing what the address bar is and how to use it. 


## Keyboard skills

Using a keyboard is fundamental to being a productive developer. A good developer can use a computer without ever having to use a mouse. With that high bar in mind, an excellent first step is to get used to using keyboard shortcuts such as: 

- opening a programming using the keyboard
- cut/copy/paste from the keyboard
- switch programs from the keyboard
- typing with all ten fingers and without looking

Challenge: Try turning off/unplugging your mouse for a day see what happens and how fast you can adjust to using the keyboard only.

[Next](./09-prework)
