---
title: Mobile First
order: 2
---

You may think that concentrating on the mobile experience first sounds
pointless, as we are more used to dealing with desktop sites, and we surely need
to consider the full gamut of features for the overall experience across
desktop, mobile, etc., before then paring it down to a mobile experience that is
simpler, more streamlined, or whatever. This rings true, yes, but in our
experience mobile first is more about having the mobile implementation as a
default layer to build on.

We should also consider that the web is increasingly dominated by mobile
devices. Tablets and smartphones are becoming the primary device by which many
users browse the web. If we are considering the international market for our web
applications and sites we should also consider that in many parts of the world,
a smartphone or tablet is the only computing device many people own.

---

# Why Mobile First?

We consider the overall experience during the planning stage, look at what
subset of features will be available on mobile, desktop, etc. in tandem and how
they will be implemented. Then at implementation stage, we present the mobile
layout and functionality as the default configuration provided, before
additional information is loaded on top of that, whenever appropriate.

This has many technical advantages, which we will present in a moment, but it
also has a planning, project management, and psychological impact as well. By
developing on a smaller device we are forced to prioritize and focus on the most
core features of our application. When we consider that many applications are
developed in an agile methodology and perhaps focus on the concept of
[MVP - Minimum Viable Product](https://www.agilealliance.org/glossary/mvp/)
developing for the small screen first makes sense. We will be less inclined to
throw in every feature to the initial implementation. Perhaps, as we develop the
app, we will discover that some features, functions, or entire pages aren't even
needed.

There are some technical impacts to consider as well. If we do not load assets
and code that the device does not need we are more likely to present a site that
feels _faster_ to the user. This also lowers the impact on our servers and our
bandwidth. It also saves the user's bandwidth, memory, and power. For mobile
users that might be on a restrictive connection, that is a win.

# Embrace Constraints

Anyone who has ever tried to enter data into a form on a mobile device, or even
just navigated around a complex site, knows this well. This is why we should try
to simplify things on mobile, keeping each view cut down to a single, simple
purpose where possible, and reducing the amount of typing users are expected to
do. The latter will please desktop users as well as mobile users!

On top of everything else, you have to consider the kinds of situations mobile
devices will be used in, and the kinds of tasks users most commonly want to
perform on mobiles. A phrase you'll read in a few places is "one eyeball, one
thumb", referring to how much of the user's attention you are likely to have. Of
course, your users will be concentrating on what they're doing, but they are
likely to be in a car with bad lighting, or in a noisy bar with sports on the TV
in the background! You need to consider this, and again make sure your
content/functionality is simple, legible and distraction-free as much as
possible.

When developing mobile app layouts, you often run into problems with navigation
menus. The concept is the same regardless of the target device — you want to
provide a mechanism for users to search for things and get to different
views/pages of the application — but because mobile screens are so much smaller,
a reasonable desktop navigation can spoil the experience by filling up most of
the initial view of the app, covering up the content.

---
