---
title: Workflow
order: 3
---

When getting started on a new application it is useful to start with a sketch of
the site. Starting with this sketch in a narrow mobile size will help you reflect on
the core aspects of the site as we mentioned.

## Start with a sketch

Nearly every web site or app should start with a sketch of the user interface.
These sketches are typically low resolution/fidelity and serve to show both the
developer and the customer what the general look and flow of the application
should be.

In their most basic forms these sketches can be pencil drawings, whiteboard
diagrams, or vector drawings in a digital tool like Visio, or another design
application.

A popular term for this type of sketch is called a
[wireframe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Website_wireframe) and implies that
the generated images are meant to be a schematic or a blueprint.

Some popular user interface sketching application even generate drawings in a
form that look hand drawn. This is to give the viewer the impression that these
are conceptual and are not meant to reflect the actual look and feel of the
application.

Also at this stage the content is mostly empty rectangles for images, links, and
input. For text we use squiggly lines. If you want to include images or text,
use [Lorem Ipsum](https://loremipsum.io/) text and generic grayscale images.

---

## Example

![Profile Sketch Wikipedia](./assets/profile-sketch.png)

This mockup is made with the popular [Balsamiq](https://balsamiq.com/) tool.

---

## Next Step

Typically we will wireframe as many of the "pages" of our application as we can
before generating any HTML or CSS. This helps us determine the various assets we
will need, what pages need to be created, and what information we will be
collecting from users and what information we will be showing to the user. This
will be critical when we start designing APIs and building backend services for
the application.

---

## Ready to make HTML and CSS?

When we are ready to make the HTML and CSS for our application we will start
coding with our browser in a configuration that is a mobile device size.

There are a few ways to do this. The first is to configure your editor and your
browser side-by-side and give the browser a narrow but tall aspect ratio. This
will also give your editor maximum space for you to code in.

The second is to use your browser's development tools to set the view into a
mobile size. In your browser we do this by engaging `Developer Tools` and
clicking this icon:

![mobile view](./assets/mobile-view.png)

Once this view is engaged, we can select several options to change the mobile
view of our web page. For instance, the _Suncoast Developers Guild_ website
looks like this when in the browser's mobile view:

![mobile view page](./assets/mobile-view-page.png)

> NOTE: This view is purely an estimation of the way the mobile browser will
> work. Selecting an iPhone or Android device simply scales the browser to that
> size but does not reproduce any of that device's specific behaviors. Real
> testing on physical mobile devices is often still required.

---
