## Simple Selectors

_"simple" selectors_ directly match one or more elements of a document, based on the type of element, `class`, or `id`.

Consider the following HTML:

```html
<p>What kind of ice cream do you like?</p>
<div>I like chocolate`.</div>
<p>I prefer VANILLA!</p>
```

With the following CSS.

```css
/* All p elements are red */
p {
  color: red;
}

/* All div elements are blue */
div {
  color: blue;
}
```

### Simple Class Based Selectors

Instead of selecting elements based on the type of tag, we can select elements based on their `class` property.

The class selector consists of a dot, `.`, followed by a class name. A class name is any value, without spaces, placed within an HTML class attribute. It is up to you to choose a name for the class. It is also noteworthy that multiple elements in a document can have the same class value, and a single element can have multiple class names separated by white space.

Consider the following HTML:

```html
<ul>
  <li class="first done">Create an HTML document</li>
  <li class="second done">Create a CSS style sheet</li>
  <li class="third">Link them all together</li>
</ul>
```

and this CSS

```css
/* The element with the class "first" is bolded */
.first {
  font-weight: bold;
}

/* All the elements with the class "done" are strikethrough */
.done {
  text-decoration: line-through;
}
```

In this case the first list item will be bold, the first two list items will be struck through, and the last item will have no additional styles applied.

### Simple ID Based Selectors

The ID selector consists of a hash/pound/octothorpe symbol `#`, followed by the ID name of a given element. Any element can have a unique ID name set with the id attribute. It is up to you to choose an ID name. It's the most efficient way to select a single element.

Consider the following HTML:

```html
<p id="polite">— "Good morning."</p>
<p id="rude">— "Go away!"</p>
```

And the following CSS:

```css
#polite {
  font-family: cursive;
}

#rude {
  font-family: monospace;
  text-transform: uppercase;
}
```

The greeting of `Good morning` will be in a cursive font while the `Go away` text will be in a typewriter style font _and_ be converted to all _UPPERCASE_

### Universal Simple Selector

The universal selector `*` is the ultimate joker. It allows selecting all elements on a page. As it is rarely used to apply a style to every element on a page, it is often used in combination with other selectors.

## Attribute Selectors

Many HTML tags are configured with attributes. For example, our `<a>` tags contain an `href` containing a URL. With attribute selectors we could apply a style to all links that are outside of our site, perhaps coloring them differently, or providing a background image to indicate the link leaves our site.

### Presence and value attribute selectors

These attribute selectors try to match an exact attribute value:

- `[attr]` : This selector will select all elements with the attribute attr, whatever its value.
- `[attr=val]` : This selector will select all elements with the attribute attr, but only if its value is val.
- `[attr~=val]`: This selector will select all elements with the attribute attr, but only if val is one of a space-separated list of words contained in attr's value.

### Substring value attribute selectors

Attribute selectors in this class are also known as "RegExp-like selectors", because they offer flexible matching in a similar fashion to regular expression (but to be clear, these selectors are not true regular expression):

- `[attr^=val]` : This selector will select all elements with the attribute attr for which the value starts with val.
- `[attr$=val]` : This selector will select all elements with the attribute attr for which the value ends with val.
- `[attr*=val]` : This selector will select all elements with the attribute attr for which the value contains the substring val. (A substring is simply part of a string, e.g. "cat" is a substring in the string "caterpillar".)

### Examples

See [the attribute selectors example](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Attribute_selectors) to see how these selectors work

[Pseudo-classes](/handbook/curriculum/fundamentals/lessons/intro-to-css/reading/06)
